The company had entered bankruptcy for the second time in 12 years and, in the
words of a Delaware court, was "a mere shell of a corporation.'
'The president of Pepsi, Charles G. Guth, even attempted to sell Pepsi to its rival Coca-Cola, but
Coke wanted no part of a seemingly doomed enterprise. During this period,
Pepsi and Coke sold cola in 6-ounce bottles. To reduce costs, Guth purchased a
large supply of recycled 12-ounce beer bottles. Initially, Pepsi priced the 12-ounce
bottles at 10 cents, twice the price of 6-ounce Cokes. However, this strategy failed
to boost sales. But then Guth had an idea: Why not sell 12-ounce Pepsis for the
same price as 6-ounce Cokes? In the Depression, this was a brilliant marketing
ploy. Pepsi's sales shot upward. By 1934 Pepsi was out of bankruptcy. Its profit
rose to $2.1 million by 1936 and to $4.2 million by 1938. Guth's decision to undercut
Coca-Cola saved the company.
This example illustrates an important point. Clearly, in 1931 Pepsi's chief objec-
tive was to increase profits so it could survive. But merely deciding to pursue this
objective could not make it happen. Charles Guth could not just order his subordi-
nates to increase Pepsi's profits. Like any company, Pepsi's management had no
direct control over its profit, market share, or any of the other markers of business
success. What Pepsi's management did control were marketing, production, and
the administrative decisions that determined its competitive position and ultimate
profitability.
Pepsi's success in the 1930s can be understood in terms of a few key economic
relationships. The most basic of these is the law of demand. The law of demand
says that, all other things being the same, the lower the price of a product, the
more of it consumers will purchase. Whether the increase in the number of units
sold translates into higher sales revenues depends on the strength of the relationship
between price and the quantity purchased. This is measured by the price elasticity of
demand. As long as Coke did not respond to Pepsi's price cut with one of its own, we
would expect that the demand for Pepsi would have been relatively sensitive to price,
Z
12 • Chapter 1 • Basic Microeconomic Principles
or, in the language of economics, price elastic. As we will see later in this chapter,
price-clastic demand implies that a price cut translates not only into higher unit
sales but also into higher sales revenue. Whether Coke is better off responding to
Pepsi's price cut depends on another relationship, that between the size of a compe-
titor and the profitability of price matching. Because Coke had such a large share of
the market, it was more profitable to keep its price high (letting Pepsi steal some of its
market) than to respond with a price cut of its own.' Finally, whether Pepsi's higher
sales revenue translates into higher profit depends on the economic relationship
between the additional sales revenue that Pepsi's price cut generated and the
additional cost of producing more Pepsi-Cola. That profits rose rapidly after the
price reduction suggests that the additional sales revenue far exceeded the additional
costs of production.
This chapter lays out basic microeconomic tools for business strategy. Most of
the elements that contributed to Pepsi's successful price-cutting strategy in the
1930s will be on display here. An understanding of the language and concepts in
this chapter will, we believe, "level the playing field," so that students with little or
no background in microeconomics can navigate most of this book just as well as stu-
dents with extensive economics training. The chapter has five main parts: (1) costs;
(2) demand, prices, and revenues; (3) the theory of price and output determination
by a profit-maximizing firm; (4) the theory of perfectly competitive markets; and
(5) game theory.
• * • COSTS
A firm's profit equals its revenues minus its costs. We begin our economics primer by
focusing on the cost side of this equation. We discuss four specific concepts in this
section: cost functions; economic versus accounting costs; long-run versus short-
run costs; and sunk costs.
Cost Functions
Total Cost Functions
Managers are most familiar with costs when they are presented as in Tables 1.1 and 1.2,
which show, respectively, an income statement and a statement of costs of goods man-
ufactured for a hypothetical producer during the year 2008.* The information in these
tables is essentially retrospective. It tells managers what happened during the past year.
But what if management is interested in determining whether a price reduction will
increase profits, as with Pepsi? The price drop will probably stimulate additional
sales, so a firm needs to know how its total costs would change if it increased
production above the previous year's level.
This is what a total cost function tells us. It represents the relationship between a
firm's total costs, denoted by TC, and the total amount of output it produces in a
given time period, denoted by Q. Figure 1.1 shows a graph of a total cost function.
For each level of output the firm might produce, the graph associates a unique
level of total cost. Why is the association between output and total cost unique? A
firm may currently be producing 100 units of output per year at a total cost of
$5,000,000, but if it were to streamline its operations, it might be able to lower
TABLE 1.1
INCOME STATEMENT: 2008
(1) Sales Revenue
(2) Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of Goods Manufactured
Add: Finished Goods Inventory 12/31/07
Less: Finished Goods Inventory 12/31/08
(3) Gross Profit: (1) minus (2)
(4) Selling and General Administrative Expenses
(5) Income from Operations: (3) minus (4)
Interest Expenses
Net Income Before Taxes
Income Taxes
Net Income
All amounts in thousands.
$13,740
$3.300
$2,950
$35.600
$14,090
521.510
$8,540
512,970
$1,210
S11,760
$4,100
57.660
costs, so that those 100 units could be produced for only $4,500,000. We resolve this
ambiguity by defining the total cost function as an efficiency relationship. It rep-
resents the relationship between total cost and output, assuming that the firm pro-
duces in the most efficient manner possible given its current technological
capabilities. Of course, firms do not always produce as efficiently as they theoretically
could.
The substantial literature on total quality management and reengineering
attests to the attention managers give to improving efficiency. This is why we stress
TABLE 1.2
STATEMENT OF COST OF GOODS MANUFACTURED: 2008
Materials:
Materials Purchases
Add: Materials Inventory 12/31/07
Less: Materials Inventory 12/31/08
(1) Cost of Materials
(2) Direct Labor
Manufacturing Overhead
Indirect Labor
Heat, Light, and Power
Repairs and Maintenance
Depreciation
Insurance
Property Taxes
Miscellaneous Factory Expenses
(3) Total Manufacturing Overhead
Total Cost of Manufacturing: (1) + (2) + (3)
Add: Work-in-Process Inventory 12/31/07
Less: Work-in-Process Inventory 12/31/08
Cost of Goods Manufactured
All amounts in thousands.
$8,700
$1.400
$1,200
$8.900
300
5
§
$200
$1,100
$50
$80
$140
$2,670
$13.870
$2,100
$2,230
$13.740
Z
3
14 • Chapter 1 • Basic Microeconomie Principles
FIGURE 1.1
TOTAL. COST FUNCTION
TC(O)
Total cost
The total cost function TC(Q) shows the total
costs that the firm would incur for a level of
output Q. The total cost function is an efficiency
relationship in that it shows the lowest possible
total cost the firm would incur to produce a level
of output, given the firm's technological
capabilities and the prices of factors of
O Output
production, such as labor and capital.
that the total cost function reflects the current capabilities of the firm. If the firm is
producing as efficiently as it knows how, then the total cost function must slope
upward: The only way to achieve more output is to use more factors of production
(labor, machinery, materials), which will raise total costs.'
Fixed and Variable Costs
The information contained in the accounting statements in Tables 1.1 and 1.2 allows
us to identify the total cost for one particular level of annual output. To map out the
total cost function more completely, we must distinguish between fixed costs and
variable costs. Variable costs, such as direct labor and commissions to salespeople,
increase as output increases. Fixed costs, such as general and administrative expenses
and property taxes, remain constant as output increases.
Three important points should be stressed when discussing fixed and variable
costs. First, the line dividing fixed and variable costs is often fuzzy. Some costs,
such as maintenance or advertising and promotional expenses, may have both fixed
and variable components. Other costs may be semifixed: fixed over certain ranges of
output but variable over other ranges.
For example, a beer distributor may be
able to deliver up to 5,000 barrels of beer a week using a single truck. But when it
must deliver between 5,000 and 10,000 barrels, it needs two trucks; between
10,000 and 15,000, three trucks; and so forth. The cost of trucks is fixed within
the intervals (0, 5,000), (5,000, 10,000), (10,000, 15,000), and so forth, but is variable
between these intervals.
Second, when we say that a cost is fixed, we mean that it is invariant to the firm's
output. It does not mean that it cannot be affected by other dimensions of the firm's
operations or decisions the firm might make. For example, for an electric utility, the
cost of stringing wires to hook up houses to the local grid depends primarily on the
number of subscribers to the system, not on the total amount of kilowatt-hours of elec-
tricity the utility generates. Other fixed costs, such as the money spent on marketing
promotions or advertising campaigns, arise from management decisions and can be
eliminated should management so desire."
Third, whether costs are fixed or variable
depends on the time period in which decisions regarding output are contemplated.
† shift
ctrl
Costs • 15
Consider, for example, an airline that is contemplating a one-week-long fare cut.
Its workers have already been hired, its schedule has been set, and its fleet has been
purchased. Within a one-week period, none of these decisions can be reversed. For
this particular decision, then, the airline should regard a significant fraction of its
costs as fixed. By contrast, if the airline contemplates committing to a year-long
reduction in fares, with the expectation that ticket sales will increase accordingly, sched-
ules can be altered, planes can be leased or purchased, and workers can be hired. In this
case, the airline should regard most of its expenses as variable. Whether the firm has the
freedom to alter its physical capital or other elements of its operations has important
implications for its cost structure and the nature of its decision making. This will be cov-
ered in more detail below when we analyze the distinction between long-run and short-
run costs.
Average and Marginal Cost Functions
Associated with the total cost function are two other cost functions: the average cost
function, AC(0), and the marginal cost function, MC(0). The average cost function
describes how the firm's average or per-unit-of-output costs vary with the amount of
output it produces. It is given by the formula
AC(0) = IC(0)
o
If total costs were directly proportional to output--for example, if they were given
a formula, such as TC(Q) = 5Q or TC(Q) = 37,000Q, or more generally, by
TC(Q) = cQ, where c is a constant-then average cost would be a constant. This
is because
AC(0) =.
= c
Often, however, average cost will vary with output. As Figure 1.2 shows, average cost
may rise, fall, or remain constant as output goes up. When average cost decreases as
output increases, there are economies of scale. When average cost increases as output
FIGURE 1.2
AVERAGE COST FUNCTION
4C(Q)
Average cost
The average cost function AC(Q) shows the
firm's average, or per-unit, cost for any level of
output Q. Average costs are not necessarily the
same at each level of output.
O Output
3
16 • Chapter 1 • Basic Microeconomic Principles
FIGURE 1.3
ECONOMIES OF SCALE AND MINIMUM EFFICIENT SCALE
Average cost
This average cost function exhibits economies of
scale at output levels up to Q. It exhibits
constant returns to scale between Q' and Q'.
It exhibits diseconomies of scale at output levels
above Q'. The smallest output level at which
economies of scale are exhausted is Q. It is thus
known as the minimum efficient scale.
9
O Output
increases, there are diseconomies of scale. When average cost remains unchanged
with respect to output, we have constant returns to scale. A production process
may exhibit economies of scale over one range of output and diseconomies of scale
over another. Figure 1.3 shows an average cost function that exhibits economies of
scale, diseconomies of scale, and constant returns to scale. Output level Q' is the
smallest level of output at which economies of scale are exhausted and is thus
known as the minimum efficient scale. The concepts of economies of scale and mini-
mum efficient scale are extremely important for understanding the size and scope of
firms and the structure of industries. We devote all of Chapter 2 to analyzing
economies of scale.
Marginal cost refers to the rate of change of total cost with respect to output.
Marginal cost may be thought of as the incremental cost of producing exactly
one more unit of output. When output is initially Q and changes by AQ units and
one knows the total cost at each output level, marginal cost may be calculated as
follows:
MC(0) = :
TC(Q + AQ) - TC(0)
ДО
For example, suppose when Q = 100 units, TC = $400,000, and when Q = 150 units,
TC = $500,000. Then AQ = 50, and MC = ($500,000 - $400,000/50 = $2,000.
Thus, total cost increases at a rate of $2,000 per unit of output when output increases
over the range 100 to 150 units.
Marginal cost often depends on the total volume of output. Figure 1.4 shows the
marginal cost function associated with a particular total cost function. At low levels of
output, such as Q', increasing output by one unit does not change total cost much, as
reflected by the low marginal cost. At higher levels of output, such as Q', a one-unit
increase in output has a greater impact on total cost, and the corresponding marginal
cost is higher.
Costs • 17
FIGURE 1.4
RELATIONShIP BETWEEN TOTAL COST AND MARGiNAL COST
TC(O)
TOO" + D
cost
TC(0")
otal
TCCO' + 1).
Q'0'+ 1
Q"0"+ 1
O Output
The marginal cost function MC(0) on the right graph is based on the total cost function TC(Q)
shown in the left graph. At output level Q', a one-unit increase in output changes costs by TC
(Q' + 1) - TC(Q'), which equals the marginal cost at Q', MC(Q). Since this change is not large,
the marginal cost is small (i.e., the height of the marginal cost curve from the horizontal axis is
small). At output level Q', a one-unit increase in output changes costs by TC(' + 1) -
ТС
(Q'), which equals the marginal cost at Q'. This change is larger than the one-unit change from
Q', so MC(Q") > MC(Q). Because the total cost function becomes steeper as Q gets larger, the
marginal cost curve must increase in output.
Businesses frequently treat average cost and marginal cost as if they were identi-
cal and use the former when making decisions that should be based on the latter. But
average cost is generally different from marginal cost. The exception is when total
costs vary in direct proportion to output, TC(Q) = cQ. In that case,
MC(0) = (0 + A0) - cO = c
which, of course, is also average cost. This result reflects a more general relationship
between marginal and average cost (illustrated in Figure 1.5):
• When average cost is a decreasing function of output, marginal cost is less than
average cost.
• When average cost neither increases nor decreases in output--because it is either
constant (independent of output) or at a minimum point--marginal cost is equal to
average cost.
• When average cost is an increasing function of output, marginal cost is greater
than average cost.
These relationships follow from the mathematical properties of average and marginal
cost, but they are also intuitive. If the average of a group of things (costs of manufac-
turing cellular phones, test scores, or whatever) increases when one more thing (one
more phone, one more test) is added to the group, then it must be because the value
of the most recently added thing -the '
"marginal"_is greater than the average.
Conversely, if the average falls, it must be because the marginal is less than the
average.
Z
3
18 • Chapter 1 • Basic Microeconomic Principles
FIGURE 1.5
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MARGINAL COST AND AVERAGE COST
ost
AC decreases
MC < AC
MC(Q)
/AC increases
MC > AC
AC(Q)
When average cost is decreasing (e.g., at output
Q), AC > MC (i.e., the average cost curve lies
above the marginal cost curve). When average
cost is increasing (e.g., at output 0"), AC < MC
(i.e., the average cost curve lies below the
marginal cost curve). When average cost is at a
minimum, AC = MC, so the two curves must
intersect.
AC at
minimum
MC = AC
Q Output
The Importance of the Time Period: Long-Run
versus Short-Run Cost Functions
We emphasized the importance of the time horizon when discussing fixed versus
variable costs. In this section, we develop this point further and consider some of
its implications.
Figure 1.6 illustrates the case of a firm whose production can take place in a facil-
ity that comes in three different sizes: small, medium, and large. Once the firm com-
mits to a production facility of a particular size, it can vary output only by varying the
quantities of inputs other than the plant size (e.g., by hiring another shift of workers).
The period of time in which the firm cannot adjust the size of its production facilities
is known as the short run. For each plant size, there is an associated short-run average
cost function, denoted by SAC. These average cost functions include the annual costs
of all relevant variable inputs (labor, materials) as well as the fixed cost (appropriately
annualized) of the plant itself.
If the firm knows how much output it plans to produce before building a plant,
then to minimize its costs, it should choose the plant size that results in the lowest
short-run average cost for that desired output level. For example, for output Qi,
the optimal plant is a small one; for output Q2, the optimal plant is a medium one;
for output Qs, the optimal plant is a large one. Figure 1.6 illustrates that for larger
outputs, the larger plant is best; for medium-output levels, the medium plant is
best; and for small-output levels, the small plant is best. For example, when output
is Qi, the reduction in average cost that results from switching from a large plant
to a small plant is SAC(Q1) - SACs (Q1). This saving arises not only from reductions
in the fixed costs of the plant but also because the firm can more efficiently tailor the
rest of its operations to its plant size. When the firm produces Q1 in the large plant,
it may need to utilize more labor to assure steady materials flows within the large
facility. The small plant may allow flows to be streamlined, making such labor
unnecessary.
The long-run average cost function is the lower envelope of the short-run aver-
age cost functions and is depicted by the bold line in Figure 1.6. It shows the lowest
attainable average cost for any particular level of output when the firm can adjust its
Coete • 19
FIGURE 1.6
SHORT-RUN AND LONG-RUN AVERAGE COST FUNCTIONS
SAG, (Q, -.
erage
SACS(O,) -
SAC (0)
SACN(Q)
/540,10
•
Q2
03 04
0 Output
The curves labeled SACS(0), SAC (Q), and SAC:(Q) are the short-run average cost functions
associated with small, medium, and large plants, respectively. For any level of output, the
optimal plant size is the one with the lowest average cost. For example, at output Qi, the small
plant is best. At output Q2, the medium plant is best. At output Qs, the large plant is best. The
long-run average cost function is the "lower envelope" of the short-run average cost functions,
represented by the bold line. This curve shows the lowest attainable average cost for any output
when the firm is free to adjust its plant size optimally.
plant size optimally. This is the average cost function the firm faces before it has
committed to a particular plant size.
In this example, the long-run average cost function exhibits economies of scale.
By operating with larger plant sizes, the firm can lower its average costs. This raises a
deceptively simple but extremely significant point. To realize the lower average costs,
the firm not only must build a large plant but also must achieve sufficient output, so
that the large plant is indeed the optimal one. It would be disastrous for the firm to
build a large plant if it only achieved an output of, say, Qi. The firm would be saddled
with an expensive underutilized facility. If we were to observe a firm in this situation,
we might be tempted to conclude that the scale economies inherent in the production
process were limited or nonexistent. This would be incorrect. Scale economies exist,
but the firm is not selling enough output needed to exploit them. These concepts are
closely tied to the concept of throughput, which we introduce in Chapter 4. Essen-
tially, firms cannot fully exploit economies of scale unless they have sufficient inputs
for production and distribution to get their products to market. Without such
throughput, strategies that hinge on scale economies are doomed to fail.
It is often useful to express short-run average costs as the sum of average fixed
costs (AFC) and average variable costs (AVC):
SAC(Q) = AFC(0) + AVC(Q)
Average fixed costs are the firm's fixed costs (i.e., the annualized cost of the firm's
plant plus expenses, such as insurance and property taxes, that do not vary with the
volume of output) expressed on a per-unit-of-output basis. Average variable costs
20 • Chapter 1 • Basic Microeconomic Principles
are the firm's variable costs (e.g., labor and materials) expressed on a per-unit-
of-output basis. For example, suppose the firm's plant has an annualized cost of
59 million and other annual fixed expenses total S1 million. Moreover, suppose
the firm's variable costs vary with output according to the formula 40°.
Then we would have
10
AFC(0) = 6
AVC(0) = 40
10
SAC(0) = 0*
- + 40
Note that as the volume of output increases, average fixed costs become smaller,
which tends to pull down SAC. Average fixed costs decline because total fixed
costs are being spread over an ever-larger production volume. Offsetting this (in
this example) is the fact that average variable costs rise with output, which pulls
SAC upward. The net effect of these offsetting forces creates the U-shaped SAC
curves in Figure 1.6.
Sunk versus Avoidable Costs
When assessing the costs of a decision, the manager should consider only those costs
that the decision actually affects. Some costs must be incurred no matter what the
decision is and thus cannot be avoided. These are called sunk costs. The opposite of
sunk costs is avoidable costs. These costs can be avoided if certain choices are made.
When weighing the costs of a decision, the decision maker should ignore sunk
costs and consider only avoidable costs.
To illustrate the concept of sunk costs, take the case of an online merchandiser of
laser printers. The merchandiser traditionally purchased large quantities of printers
from the manufacturer so that it could satisfy rush orders. Increasingly, though,
the merchandiser was carrying high inventories, including some lines that the man-
ufacturer no longer produced and would not repurchase. A natural response to this
problem would be to put the discontinued lines on sale and reduce inventory. How-
ever, the firm's managers were reluctant to do this. They felt that even in the best of
times the margins on their products barely covered their overhead and, by cutting the
price, they would be unable to cover their cost of the goods they sold.
This argument is wrong. The cost incurred to purchase the laser printers is a
sunk cost as far as pricing is concerned. Whether or not the merchandiser cuts
price, it cannot avoid these costs. If it believes that a seller should never price
below average cost, the merchandiser will end up with large losses. Instead, it should
accept that it cannot undo past decisions (and their associated sunk costs) and strive
to minimize its losses.
It is important to emphasize that whether a cost is sunk depends on the decision
being made and the options at hand. In the example just given, the cost of the
discontinued lines of printers is a sunk cost with respect to the pricing decision
today. But before the printers were ordered, their cost would not have been sunk.
By not ordering them, the merchandiser would have avoided the purchase and
storage costs.
Economic Casts and Profitability • 21
Stents often confuse sunk costs with fixed costs. The two concepts are not the
same. In partienlar, some fixed costs need nor be sunk. For exampie, a railroad serving
Sydney to Adelaide needs a locomotive and a crew whether it hauls I carload of
Freight or 20. The cost of the locomorive is thus a fixed cost. However, it is not
necessarily sunk. If the milroad abandons its Sydney-to-Adelaide line, it can sell
the Incomarive to another nailtoad or redeploy it to another route.
Sunk costs are important for the study of strategy, particularly in analyzing ri-
wally among firms, making decisions to enter or exit markets, and deciding whether
ts adope new rechnologies.)
For example, the concept of sunk costs helps explain why
established American steel firms were unwilling to invest in continuous casting tech-
nology, even as new Japanese firms building " greenfield" facilities did adopt the new
technology. The new technology had higher fixed costs. but lower variable operating
costs. Established American firms viewed the fixed cost of their old technologies as
sunk. Thus, dey compared the savings in operating costs against the fixed cost of
the new technology: The Japanese firms, in contrast, compared the savings in oper-
ating costs against the difference berween the fixed costs of the new and old technol-
ogies. American firms thus required a larger cost savings than the Japanese firms to
induce them to adopt the new technology. Despite criticism in the popular business
press, die American firms' decisions to delay adoption of new technology was eco-
nomically sound, serving to maximize profits even if it did entail higher operating
casts. We will rerurn to the concent of sunk costs throughout the text.
ECONOMIC COSTS AND PROFITABILITY
Economic versus Accounting Costs
The costs in Tables I.D and 1.2 reflect the accountant's concept of costs.. This con-
cept is grounded in die principles of accrual accounting, which emphasize historical
costs. Acenunting statements- in particular, income statements and balance sheets-
are designed to serve an audience outside the firm, such as lenders and equity inves-
tors. The accounting numbers must thus be objective and verifiable, principles that
are well served by historical costs.
However, the costs dat appear in accounting statements are not necessarily
appropriate for decision making inside a firm. Business decisions require the
measurement of economic costs, which are based on the concept of opportunity
cost. This concept says that the economic cost of deploying resources in a particular
activity is the value of the best forgone alternative use of chose resources. Économic
cost may not correspond to the historical costs represented in Tables L.I and 1.2.
Suppose, for example, dat the firm purchased its raw materials at a price below
Their current market price. Would the costs of goods manufactured in Table 1.2 rep-
resent tie cconomic cost to the firm of using these resources? The answer is no.
When the firm uses them to produce finished goods, it forsakes the alternative of
reselling the materials at the market price. The economic cost of the firm's pro-
ducrion activities reflects this forgone opportunity.
At a broader level, consider the resources (plant, equipment, land, etc.) that have
Been purchased with funds that stockholders provide to the firm. To attract these
funds, the firm must offer the stockholders a return on their investment that is at
least as large as the return that they could have received from investing in activities
of comparable risk. To illustrate, suppose that at the beginning of 2009. a firm's
22 • Chapter I • Basie Microeconomie Prineiples
assets could have been liquidated for $100 million. By tying their funds up in the firm,
investors lose the opportunity to invest the $100 million in an activity providing an H
percent return. Morcover, suppose that because of wear and tear and ereeping obso.
lescence of plant and equipment, the value of the assets deelines by 1 percent over the
year 2009. The annualized cost of the firm's assets for 2009 is then (0.08 + 0.01) *
$100 million = $9 million per year. This is an economie cost, but it would not appear
in the firm's income statement.
In studying strategy, we are interested in analyzing why firms make their decisions
and what distinguishes good decisions from poor ones, given the opportunities and the
constraints firms face. in our formal theories of firm behavior, we thus emphasize
economic costs rather than historical accounting costs. This is not to say that account
ing costs have no place in the study of business strategy. Quite the contrary: In assess-
ing the past performance of the firm, in comparing one firm in an industry to another,
or in evaluating the financial strength of a firm, the informed use of accounting state-
ments and accounting ratio analysis can be illuminating. However, the concept of
opportunity cost provides the best basis for good economie decisions when the firm
must choose among competing alternatives. A firm that consistently deviated from
this idea of cost would miss opportunities for earning higher profits. In the end, it
might be driven out of business by firms that are better at seizing profit-enhancing
opportunities, or it may find itself starved for capital as investors bid down its stock
price. Whenever we depict a cost function or discuss cost throughout this book, we
have in mind the idea of costs as including all relevant opportunity costs.
Economic Profit versus Accounting Profit
Having distinguished between economic cost and accounting cost, we can now
distinguish between economic profit and accounting profit:
• Accounting profit = Sales revenue - Accounting cost.
• Economic profit = Sales revenue - Economic cost
= Accounting profit - (Economic cost - Accounting cost).
To illustrate the distinction between the two concepts, consider a small software
development firm that is owner operated. In 2009, the firm earned revenue of
$1,000,000 and incurred expenses on supplies and hired labor of $850,000. The owner's
best outside employment opportunity would be to earn a salary of $200,000 working for
Microsoft. The software firm's accounting profit is $1,000,000 - $850,000 = $150,000.
The software firm's economic profit deducts the opportunity cost of the owner's labor
services and is thus $1,000,000 - $850,000 - $200,000 = -$50,000. This means that
the owner made $50,000 less in income by operating this business than she could
have made in her best outside alternative. The software business "destroyed" $50,000
of the owner's wealth in that, by operating the software business, she earned $50,000
less income than she might have otherwise.
• • * • DEMAND AND REVENUES
The second component of profit is sales revenue, which is intimately related to the
firm's pricing decision. To understand how a firm's sales revenue depends on its pric-
ing decision, we will explore the concept of a demand eurve and the price elasticity of
demand.
Demand and Revenues • 23
Demand Curve
The demand function describes the relationship between the quantity of product that
the firm is able to sell and all the variables that influence that quantity. These vari-
ables include the price of the product, the prices of related products, the incomes
and tastes of consumers, the quality of the product, advertising, and many other vari-
ables commonly thought to make up the firm's marketing mix. With so many vari-
ables, it would be difficult to depict the demand function on a graph.
Of special interest is the relationship between quantity and price. To focus on
this important relationship, imagine that all the other variables that influence the
quantity demanded remain fixed, and consider how the quantity demanded would
change as the price changes.
We can show this simple relationship on a graph.
Figure 1.7 depicts a demand curve. We would expect the demand curve to be down-
ward sloping: The lower the price, the greater the quantity demanded; the higher the
price, the smaller the quantity demanded. This inverse relationship is called the law of
demand.
The law of demand may not hold if high prices confer prestige or enhance a prod-
uct's image, or when consumers cannot objectively assess the potential performance of
a product and use price to infer quality. Both prestige and signaling effects could
result in demand curves that slope upward for some range of prices. Even so, personal
experience and countless studies from economics and marketing confirm that the law
of demand applies to most products.
As Figure 1.7 shows, the demand curve is typically drawn with price on the ver-
tical axis and quantity on the horizontal axis. This may seem strange because we think
that price determines the quantity demanded, not the other way around. However,
this representation emphasizes a useful alternative interpretation for a demand
curve. Not only does the demand curve tell us the quantity consumers will purchase
at any given price, it also tells us the highest possible price that the market will bear
for a given quantity or supply of output. Thus, in Figure 1.7, if the firm sets a target
of selling output level Q' (which might be what it can produce by running at full
capacity), the demand curve tells us that the highest price the firm can charge is P'.
FIGURE 1.7
DEMAND CURVE
Price
The demand curve shows the quantity of a
product that consumers will purchase at different
prices. For example, at price P consumers
purchase Q' units of the product. We would
expect an inverse relationship between quantity
and price. so this curve is downward sloping.
Q Quantity
24 • Chapter 1 • Basic Microeconomic Principles
The Price Elasticity of Demand
Look at a firm that is considering a price increase. The firm understands that accord-
ing to the law of demand, the increase in price will result in the loss of some sales. This
may be acceptable if the loss in sales is not "too large." If sales do not suffer much, the
firm may actually increase its sales revenue when it raises its price. If sales drop sub-
stantially, however, sales revenues may decline, and the firm could be worse off.
Figure 1.8 illustrates the implications of the firm's pricing decision when its
demand curve has one of two alternative shapes, D4 and De. Suppose the firm is cur-
rently charging Po and selling Qo, and is considering an increase in price to P4. If the
firm's demand curve is D4, the price increase would cause only a small drop in sales.
In this case, the quantity demanded is not very sensitive to price. We would suspect
that the increase in price would increase sales revenue because the price increase
swamps the quantity decrease. By contrast, if the firm's demand curve is D, the
increase in price would cause a large drop in sales. Here, the quantity demanded
is very sensitive to price. We would expect that the price increase would decrease
sales revenues.
As this analysis shows, the shape of the demand curve can strongly affect the suc-
cess of the firm's pricing strategy. The concept of the price elasticity of demand sum-
marizes this effect by measuring the sensitivity of quantity demanded to price. The
price elasticity of demand, commonly denoted by n, is the percentage change in
quantity brought about by a 1 percent change in price. Letting subscript "0" rep-
resent the initial situation and "|" represent the situation after the price changes,
the formula for elasticity is
10/00
AP/Po
where AP = P, - Po is the change in price, and AQ = Q, - Qo is the resulting change
in quantity." To illustrate this formula, suppose price is initially $5, and the
FiGuRe 1
PRICE SENSITIVTTY AND THE SHAPE OF THE DEMAND CURVE
When the demand curve is D4, a change in price
from Po to P, has only a small effect on the
quantity demanded. However, when the demand
curve is De, the same change in price results in a
large drop in quantity demanded. When D4 is
the demand curve, we would conjecture that the
increase in price would increase sales revenues,
but when De is the demand curve, the price
increase would reduce sales revenues.
Q0
Q Quantity
corresponding quantity demanded is 1,000 units. If the price rises to $5.75, though,
the quantiry demanded would fall to 800 units. Then
800 - 1000
1000
5.75 - 5
-0.20
= 1.33
0.15
Thus, over the range of prices between $5.00 and $5.75, quantity demanded falls at a
rate of 133 percent for every 1 percent increase in price.
The price elasticity n might be less than I or greater than I.
• If m is less than 1, we say that demand is imelatis, which is the situation along
demand curve D, for the price change being considered.
• If n is greater than 1, we say that demand is elastic, which is the situation
along demand curve Ds for the price change being considered.
Given an estimate of the price elasticity of demand, a manager could calculate the
expected percentage change in quantity demanded resulting from a given change
in price by muitiplying the percentage change in price by the estimated elasticity.
To illustrite, suppose management believed n7 = 0.75.
If it contemplated a 3 percent
increase in price, then it should expect a 3 x 0.75 = 2.25 percent drop in the quantity
demanded as a resalt of the price increase.
Price elasticities can be estimated wing statistical techniques, and economists
and marketers have estimated price elasticities for many products. But in most prac-
tical situations, managers will not have the benefit of a precise numerical estimate of
elasticity based on statistical techniques. Consequently, the manager must rely on his
or her knowledge of the product and the nature of the market to estimate price sen-
sitivity. Among the factors that tend to make demand for the firm's product more
sensitive to price are the following:
• The product has few
features that differentiate it from rival products, and
buyers are aware of the prices and features of rival products. Airline service is a good
example of a product that is hard to differentiate and where consumers can easily
inform themselves of the range of prices that exist in a particular market.
•Buvers" expenditures on the produ act are a large fraction of their total expenditures.
La this case, the savings from finding a comparable item at a lower price are
large, so consumers tend to shop more than when making small purchases.
Refrigerators and washing machines are products whose demand is fairly price
sensitive beczuse consumers are motivated to shop around before purchasing.
• The product is an input that buyers us e to produce a final good whose demand is
itself sensitive to price. In this case, if buyers tried to pass through to their cus-
toners even small changes in the price of the input, demand for the finished good
could decrease drimatically. The input buyers will thus be very sensitive to price.
le. a personal computer manufacturer's demand for components and
-rials is Mely to be highly price elastic because consumer demand for personal
Among the factors that tend to make demand less sensitive to price are the following.
• Comparisons among substitute products are difficult. This could be because the prod-
act is complex and has many performance dimensions, because consumers have
26 • Chapter I • Basic Microeconomic Principles
little or no experience with substitute products and thus would face a risk if they
purchased them, or because comparison shopping is costly. Items sold door-to-door,
such as Avon cosmetics, have traditionally been price inelastic because, at the time
of sale, most consumers lack good information about the prices of alternatives.
• Because of tax deductions or insurance, buyers pay only a fraction of the full price
of the product. Health care is an excellent example.
• A buyer would incur significant costs if it switched to a substitute product.
Switching costs could arise if the use of a product requires specialized training
or expertise that is not fully transferable across different varieties of the
product. For example, to the extent that a consumer develops expertise in
using a particular word-processing package that is incompatible with available
alternatives, switching costs will be high, and price sensitivity for upgrades
will be low.
• The product is used in conjunction with another product that buyers have com-
mitted themselves to. For example, an owner of a copying machine is likely to be
fairly insensitive to the price of toner, because the toner is an essential input in
running the copier.
Brand-Level versus Industry-Level Elasticities
Students often mistakenly suppose that just because the demand for a product is
inelastic, the demand facing each seller of that product is also inelastic. Consider,
for example, gasoline. Many studies have documented that the demand for gasoline
is price inelastic, with elasticities of around 0.10-0.20. This suggests that a general
increase in the prices charged at all gas stations would only modestly affect overall
gasoline demand. However, if only one gas station increases its price, the demand
for that gas station would probably drop substantially because consumers would
patronize other stations. Thus, while demand can be inelastic at the industry level,
it can be highly elastic at the brand level.
Should a firm use an industry-level elasticity or a firm-level elasticity in asses-
sing the impact of a price change? The answer depends on what the firm expects its
rivals to do. If a firm expects that rivals will quickly match its price change, then
the industry-level elasticity is appropriate. If, by contrast, a firm expects that rivals
will not match its price change (or will do so only after a long lag), then the brand-
level elasticity is appropriate. For example, Pepsi's price cut succeeded because
Coke did not retaliate. Had Coke cut its price, the outcome of Pepsi's strategy
would have been different. Making educated conjectures about how rivals will
respond to pricing moves is a fascinating subject. We will encounter this subject
again in Chapter 10.
Total Revenue and Marginal Revenue Functions
A firm's total revenue function, denoted by TR(Q), indicates how the firm's sales rev-
enues vary as a function of how much product it sells. Recalling our interpretation of
the demand curve as showing the highest price P(Q) that the firm can charge and sell
exactly Q units of output, we can express total revenue as
TR(0) = P(2)Q
Demand and Revenues • 27
Just as a fire is interested in the impact of a change in output on its costs, it is
also interested in how a change in output will affect its
firm's
marginal revenue, MAX is analogous to its marginal cost. It represents the
rate of change in total revenue that results from the sale of AQ additional units
of output:
TR(O + 40) - TR(0)
MA(0) =
40
It seems plausible that total revenue would go up as the firm sells more our
put, and thus AR would always be positive. But with a downward sloping demand
curve, this is not necessarily true.
To sell more, the firm must lower its price.
Thus while it generates revenue on the extra units of output it sells at the
lower price, it loses revenue on all the units it would have sold at the higher
price. Economists call this the reeven destraction effect. For example, an online
electronics retailer may sell 110 DVDs per day at a price of SIl per dise and
120 DVDs at 59 per disc. It gains additional revenue of $90 per day on the
extra 10 DVDs sold at the lower price of $9, but it sacrifices $220 per day on
the 110 DVDs that it could have sold for $2 more. The marginal revenue in
this case would equal - $130/10, or -$13; the store loses sales revenue of $13
for each additional DVD it sells when it drops its price from $11 to $9.
In general, whether marginal revenue is positive or negative depends on the price
elasticity of demand. The formal relationship (whose derivation is not important for
our purposes) is
MRIO) = P(1 - 1)
For example, if »= 0.75, and the current price P= $15, then marginal revenue
MR = 15(1 - 1/0.75) = - S5. More generally,
• When demand is elastie, so that » > 1, it follows that MR > 0. In this case, the
increase in output brought about by a reduction in price will raise total sales
revenues.
• When demand is inelastic, so that 1 < 1, it follows that MIR < 0. Here, the
increase in output brought about by a reduction in price will lower total sales
revenue.
Note that this formula implies that MR < P. This makes sense in light of what
we just discussed. The price P is the additional revenue the firm gets from each
additional unit it sells, but the overall change in revenues from selling an additional
unit must factor in the revenue destruction effect.
Figure 1.9 shows the graph of a demand curve and its associated marginal
revenue curve. Because MR < P, the marginal revenue curve must lie everywhere
below the demand curve, except at a quantity of zero. For most demand curves,
the marginal revenue curve is everywhere downward sloping and at some point
will shift from being positive to negative. (This occurs at output Q' in the
figure.)
28 • Chapter 1 • Basie Mieroeconomic Principles
FIGURE 1.9
THE MARGINAL REVENUE CURVE AND THE DEMAND CURVE
Price, marginal revenue
MR represents the marginal revenue curve
associated with the demand curve D. Because
MR < P, the marginal revenue curve must lie
everywhere below the demand curve except at a
quantity of 0. Marginal revenue is negative for
quantities in excess of Q.
Q Quantity
THEORY OF THE FIRM: PRICING AND OUTPUT DECISIONS
Part Two of this book studies the structure of markets and competitive rivalry within
industries. To set the stage for this analysis, we need to explore the theory of the firm,
a theory of how firms choose their prices and quantities. This theory has both explan-
atory power and prescriptive usefulness. That is, it sheds light on how prices are
established in markets, and it also provides tools to aid managers in making pricing
decisions.
The theory of the firm assumes that the firm's ultimate objective is to make as
large a profit as possible. The theory is therefore appropriate to managers whose
goal is to maximize profits. Some analysts argue that not all managers seek to
maximize profits, so that the theory of the firm is less useful for describing actual
firm behavior. An extensive discussion of the descriptive validity of the profit-
maximization hypothesis would take us beyond this primer. Suffice to say that a
powerful "evolutionary" argument supports the profit-maximization hypothesis: if,
over the long haul, a firm's managers did not strive to achieve the largest amount
of profit consistent with industry economics and its own particular resources, the
firm would either disappear or its management would be replaced by one that better
served the owners' interests.
Ideally, for any given amount of output the firm might want to sell, it would
prefer to set price as high as it could. As we have seen, though, the firm's demand
curve limits what that price can be. How, then, is the optimal output determined?
This is where the concepts of marginal revenue and marginal cost become useful.
Recalling that "marginals" are rates of change (change in cost or revenue per one-
unit change in output), the changes in revenue, cost, and profit from changing
output by AQ units (where AQ can either represent an increase in output, in
Theory of the Firm: Pricing and Output Decisions • 29
which case it is a positive amount, or a decrease in output, in which case it is a
negative amount) are
Change in Total Revenue = MR > AQ
Change in Total Cost = MC * AQ
Change in Total Profit = (MR - MC) * AQ
The firm clearly would like to increase profit. Here's how:
• If MR > MC, the firm can increase profit by selling more (AQ > 0), and to
do so, it should lower its price.
• If MR < MC, the firm can increase profit by selling less (AQ < 0), and to
do so, it should raise its price.
• If MR = MC, the firm cannot increase profits either by increasing or decreasing
output. It follows that output and price must be at their optimal levels.
Figure 1.10 shows a firm whose output and price are at their optimal levels.
The curve D is the firm's demand curve, MR is the marginal revenue curve, and
MC is the marginal cost curve.
The optimal output occurs where MR = MC, that
is, where the MR and MC curves intersect. This is output Q* in the diagram.
The optimal price P* is the associated price on the demand curve.
An alternative and perhaps more managerially relevant way of thinking about
these principles is to express MR in terms of the price elasticity of demand. Then
the term MR = MC can be written as
P(1-1 = мс
Let us now suppose that, as a first approximation, the firm's total variable costs
are directly proportional to output, so that MC = c, where c is the firm's average variable
FIGURE 1.10
OPTIMAL QUANTIIY AND PRICE FOR A PROFTT-MAXIMIZING FIRM
Price, marginal
The firm's optimal quantity occurs at Q*, where
MR = MC. The optimal price P is the price the
firm must charge to sell Q* units. It is found from
the demand curve.
30 • Chapter 1 • Basic Microeconomic Principles
cost. The percentage contribution margin, or PCM, on additional units sold is the ratio
of profit per unit to revenue per unit, or PCM = (P - 0)/P. Algebra establishes that
MR - MC > 0 as n > 1/PCM
MR - MC < 0 as m < 1/PCM
which implies that
• A firm should lower its price whenever the price elasticity of demand exceeds the
reciprocal of the percentage contribution margin on the additional units it
would sell by lowering its price.
• A firm should raise its price when the price elasticity of demand is less than the
reciprocal of the percentage contribution margin of the units it would not sell by
raising its price.
These principles can guide pricing decisions even though managers do not know
the firm's demand curve or marginal cost function. Managers have only to make edu-
cated conjectures about the relative magnitude of elasticities and contribution
margins.I An example may help cement these concepts. Suppose P= $10 and
= 55, so PCM = 0.50. Then the firm can increase profits by lowering its price if
its price elasticity of demand n exceeds 1/0.5 = 2. If, instead, P= $10 and c = $8,
so that PCM = 0.2, the firm should cut its price if n> 5. As this example shows,
the lower a firm's PCM (e.g., because its marginal cost is high), the greater its
price elasticity of demand must be for a price-cutting strategy to raise profits.
• • • • PERFECT COMPETITION
A special case of the theory of the firm is the theory of perfect competition. This the-
ory highlights how market forces shape and constrain a firm's behavior and interact
with the firm's decisions to determine profitability. The theory deals with a stark
competitive environment: an industry with many firms producing identical products
(so that consumers choose among firms solely on the basis of price) and where firms
can enter or exit the industry at will. This is a caricature of any real market, but it
does approximate industries such as aluminum smelting and copper mining in
which many firms produce nearly identical products.
Because firms in a perfectly competitive industry produce identical products,
each firm must charge the same price. This market price is beyond the control of
any individual firm; it must take the market price as given. For a firm to offer to
sell at a price above the market price would be folly because it would make no
sales. Offering to sell below the market price would also be folly because the firm
would needlessly sacrifice revenue. As shown in Figure 1.11, then, a perfectly com-
petitive firm's demand curve is perfectly horizontal at the market price, even though
the industry demand curve is downward sloping. Put another way, the firm-level
price elasticity of demand facing a perfect competitor is infinite, even though the
industry-level price elasticity is finite.
Given any particular market price, each firm must decide how much to produce.
Applying the insights from the theory of the firm, the firm should produce at the
point where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. When the firm's demand
curve is horizontal, each additional unit it sells adds sales revenue equal to the market
Perfect Competition • 31
FIGURE 1.11
DEMAND AND SUPPLY CURVES FOR A PERFECTLY COMPETTTIVE FIRM
A perfectly competitive firm takes the market
price as given and thus faces a horizontal demand
curve at the market price. This horizontal line
also represents the firm's marginal revenue curve
MR. The firm's optimal output occurs where its
marginal revenue equals marginal cost.
the market price is Po, the optimal output is Qo-
If the market price were to change, the firm's
optimal quantity would also change. At price Pr,
the optimal output is Qi. At price Po, the optimal
output is Qo. The firm's supply curve traces out
the relationship between the market price and
the firm's optimal quantity of output. This curve
is identical to the firm's marginal cost curve.
É Pr
Price, marginal
P.
Po
Qo
Q, 02
0 Onantity
price. Thus, the firm's marginal revenue equals the market price, and the optimal
output, shown in Figure 1.11, is where marginal cost equals the market price.
If we were to graph how a firm's optimal output changed as the market price
changed, we would trace out a curve that is identical to the firm's marginal cost func-
tion. This is known as the firm's supply curve. It shows the amount of output the
perfectly competitive firm would sell at various market prices. Thus, the supply
curve of a perfectly competitive firm is identical to its marginal cost function.
If we aggregate over the firm supply curves of all active producers in the industry,
we get the industry supply curve, depicted in Figure 1.12 as SS. This figure shows an
FIGURE 1.12
FIRM AND INDUSTRY SUPPLY CURVES UNDER PERFECT COMPETTTION
S15
Price, marginal
S10
40
units units
Firm's quantity
40.000 50.000
units units
Industry quantity
A single firm's supply curve is shown in the graph on the left. The industry's supply curve SS is
shown in the graph on the right. These graphs depict an industry of 1,000 identical firms.
Thus, at any price the industry supply is 1,000 times the amount that a single firm would
supply.
32 • Chapter 1 • Basic Microeconomic Principles
industry with 1,000 identical active firms. At any price, the industry supply is 1,000
times the supply of an individual firm. Given the industry supply curve, we can
now see how the market price is determined. For the market to be in equilibrium,
the market price must be such that the quantity demanded equals the quantity sup
plied by firms in the industry. This situation is depicted in Figure 1.13, where p.
denotes the price that "clears" the market. If the market price was higher than P°.
then more of the product would be offered for sale than consumers would like to
buy. The excess supply would then place downward pressure on the market price.
If the market price was lower than P°, then there would be less of the product offered
for sale than consumers would like to buy. Here, the excess demand would exert
upward pressure on the market price. Only when the quantities demanded and sup-
plied are equal--when price equals P*_-is there no pressure on price to change.
The situation shown in Figure 1.13 would be the end of the story if additional
firms could not enter the industry. However, in a perfectly competitive industry, firms
can enter and exit at will. The situation in Figure 1.13 is thus unstable because firms
in the industry are making a profit (price exceeds average cost at the quantity a* that
each firm supplies). Thus, it will be attractive for additional firms to enter and begin sell-
ing. Figure 1.14 shows the adjustment that oceurs. As more firms enter, the supply curve
SS shifts outward to SS. As this happens, the quantity supplied exceeds the quantity
demanded, and there is pressure on price to fall. It will continue to fall until no additional
entry occurs. This is when the market price just equals a typical firm's average cost. As we
have seen, to optimize output, firms produce where market price equals marginal cost.
Thus, in the long-run equilibrium depicted in Figure 1.14, firms are producing at mini-
mum efficient scale (recall, this is the quantity corresponding to the minimum point on
the average cost curve), and the equilibrium market price P** equals the minimum level
of average cost.
FIGURE 1.13
PERFECTLY COMPETITIve INDUStRy PRioR TO NEw ENtRy
Price, marginal cost, average
Profit
per unit
Firm's quantity
Industry quantity
At the price P°, each firm is producing its optimal amount of output 4*. Moreover, the quantity
demanded equals the quantity Q* supplied by all firms in the industry. However, each firm is
earning a positive profit because at q*, the price P* exceeds average cost AC(*), resulting in a
profit on every unit sold. New firms would thus want to enter this industry.
Perfect Competition • 33
rice, marginal cost, average cost
!
PERFECTLY COMPETITIVE INDUSTRY AT LONG-RUN EOUlLiBRIUM
FIGURE 1.14
Firm's quantity
Industry quantity
At price P°, new entrants are attracted to the industry. As they come in, the industry's supply
curve shifts to the right, from SS to SS', resulting in a reduction in market price. Entry ceases
to occur when firms are earning as muc h inside the industry as they can earn outside it. Each
firm thus earns zero economic profit, or equivalently, price equals average cost. Firms are
choosing the optimal out t and earning zero economic profit when they produce at the point
at which market price equals both marginal cost and average cost. This occurs when the price is
P* and firms produce a*. Firms are thus at the minimum point on their average cost function.
Suppose, now, that market demand suddenly falls. Figure 1.15 shows what hap-
pens. The fall in market demand is represented by a shift from demand curve Do to
D.. Initially, market price would fall to P and firms' revenues would not cover their
economic costs. The industry "shakeout" then begins. Firms begin to exit the indus-
try. As this occurs, the industry supply curve shifts to the left, and price begins to rise.
Once the shakeout fully unfolds, the industry supply curve will have shifted to SS,
and the market price will once again reach P**.
. Firms are then again optimizing on
output and earning zero profit. Thus, no matter what the level of industry demand,
the industry will eventually supply output at the price P**.
This theory implies that free entry exhausts all opportunities for making profit.
This implication sometimes troubles management students because it seems to
suggest that firms in perfectly competitive industries would then earn zero net
income. But remember the distinction between economic costs and accounting
costs. Economic costs reflect the relevant opportunity costs of the financial capital
that the owners have provided to the firm. Zero profits thus means zero economic
profit, not zero accounting profit. Zero economic profit simply means that investors
are earning returns on their investments that are commensurate with what they could
earn from their next best opportunity.
That free entry dissipates economic profit is one of the most powerful insights in
economics, and it has profound implications for strategy. Firms that base their strat-
egies on products that can be easily imitated or skills and resources that can be easily
acquired put themselves at risk to the forces that are highlighted by the theory of per-
fect competition. To attain a competitive advantage, a firm must secure a position in
34 • Chapter 1 • Basic Microeconomic Principles
FIGURE 1.15
EFFECT OF A REDUCTION IN DEMAND ON THE LONG-RUN PERFECTLY COMPETITIVE
Firm's quantity
Industry quantity
When demand falls, the demand curve shifts from Do to Di, and price would initially fall to P.
Firms would earn less than they could elsewhere and would eventually begin to leave the
industry. As this happens, the supply curve shifts to the left from S$ to SS,. The industry
shakeout ends when price is again P**.
the market that protects itself from imitation and entry. How firms might do this is
the subject of Chapters 13, 14, and 15.
• GAME THEORY
The perfectly competitive firm faces many competitors, but in making its output
decision, it does not consider the likely reactions of its rivals. This is because the
decisions of any single firm have a negligible impact on market price. The key stra-
tegic challenge of a perfectly competitive firm is to anticipate the future path of prices
in the industry and maximize against it.
In many strategic situations, however, there are few players. For example, four
producers- -Asahi, Kirin, Sapporo, and Suntory-account for well over 90 percent
of sales in the Japanese beer market. In the market for transoceanic commercial air-
craft, there are just two producers: Boeing and Airbus. In these "small numbers" situ-
ations, a key part of making strategic decisions--pricing, investment in new facilities,
and so forth--is anticipating how rivals may react.
A natural way to incorporate the reactions of rivals into your analysis of strategic
options is to assign probabilities to their likely actions or reactions and then choose
the decision that maximizes the expected value of your profit, given this probability dis-
tribution. But this approach has an important drawback: How do you assign probabil-
ities to the range of choices your rivals might make? You may end up assigning positive
probabilities to decisions that, from the perspective of your competitors, would be fool-
ish. If so, then the quality of your "decision analysis" would be seriously compromised.
A more penetrating approach would be to attempt to "get inside the minds" of your
competitors, figure out what is in their self-interest, and then maximize accordingly.
you
nOT
and
=
qu
§
FE
Game Theory • 35
However, your rivals' optimal choices will often depend on their expectations of what
you intend to do, which, in turn. depend on their assessments of your assessments
about them. How can one sensibly analyze decision making with this circularity?
Game theory is most valuable in precisely such contexts. It is the branch of eco-
nomics concerned with the analysis of optimal decision making when all decision
makers are presumed to be rational and each is attempting to anticipate the actions
and reactions of its competitors. Much of the material in Part Two on industry analy-
sis and competitive strategy draws on basic game theory. In this section, we introduce
these basic ideas. In particular, we discuss games in matrix and game tree form as well
as the concepts of a Nash equilibrium and subgame perfection.
Games in Matrix Form and the Concept of Nash Equilibrium
The easiest way to introduce the basic elements of game theory is through a simple
example. Consider an industry that consists of two firms, Alpha and Beta, that pro-
duce identical products. Each must decide whether to increase its production capacity
in the upcoming year. We will assume that each firm always produces at full capacity.
Thus, expansion of capacity entails a tradeoff. The firm may achieve a larger share of
the market, but it may also put downward pressure on the market price. The conse-
quences of each firm's choices are described in Table 1.3. The first entry is Alpha's
annual economic profit; the second entry is Beta's annual economic profit.
Each firm will make its capacity decision simultaneously and independently of
the other firm. To identify the "likely outcome" of games like the one shown in
Table 1.3, game theorists use the concept of a Nash equilibrium. At a Nash equi-
librium outcome, each player is doing the best it can, given the strategies of the
other players. In the context of the capacity expansion game, the Nash equilibrium
is that pair of strategies (one for Alpha, one for Beta) such that
• Alpha's strategy maximizes its profit, given Beta's strategy.
• Beta's strategy maximizes its profit, given Alpha's strategy.
In the capacity expansion game, the Nash equilibrium is (EXPAND, EXPAND);
that is, each firm expands its capacity. Given that Alpha expands its capacity, Beta's
best choice is to expand its capacity (yielding profit of 16 rather than 15). Given
that Beta expands its capacity, Alpha's best choice is to expand its capacity.
In this example, the determination of the Nash equilibrium is fairly easy, because
for each firm the strategy EXPAND maximizes profit no matter what decision its
competitor makes. In this situation, we say that EXPAND is a dominant strategy.
TABLE 1.3
CAPACITY GAME BETWEEN ALPHA AND BETA
Beta
Alpha
DO NOT EXPAND
EXPAND
Do Not Expand
$18, $18
$20, $15
All amounts are in millions per year. Alpha's payoff is first; Beta's is second.
Expand
S15, $20
$16, $16
36 - Chapter 1 • Basic Microcconomic Principles
TABLE 1.4
MODIFIED CAPACITY GAME BETWEEN ALPHA AND BETA
Beta
DO NOT EXPAND
Alpha
SMALL
Do Not Expand
$18, 518
520, 515
618. 59
LARGE
All amounts are in millions per year. Alpha's payoff is first; Beta's is second.
Small
515, 520
516,516
512, 58
Expand
59, 518
S8. S12
SO, SO
When a player has a dominant strategy, it follows (from the definition of the Nash
equilibrium) that that strategy must also be the player's Nash equilibrium strategy.
However, dominant strategies are not inevitable; in many games players do not
possess dominant strategies (e.g., the game in Table 1.4).
Why does the Nash equilibrium represent a plausible outcome of a game? Prob-
ably its most compelling property is that it is a self-enforcing focal point: If each party
expects the other party to choose its Nash equilibrium strategy, then both parties
will, in fact, choose their Nash equilibrium strategies. At the Nash equilibrium,
then, expectation equals outcome expected behavior and actual behavior converge.
This would not be true at non-Nash equilibrium outcomes, as the game in Table 1.4
illustrates. Suppose Alpha (perhaps foolishly) expects Beta not to expand capacity and
refrains from expanding its own capacity to prevent a drop in the industry price level.
Beta--pursuing its own self-interest-would confound Alpha's expectations, expand
its capacity, and make Alpha worse off than it expected to be.
The capacity expansion game illustrates a noteworthy aspect of a Nash equilib-
rium. The Nash equilibrium does not necessarily correspond to the outcome that
maximizes the aggregate profit of the players. Alpha and Beta would be collectively
better off by refraining from the expansion of their capacities. However, the rational
pursuit of self-interest leads each party to take an action that is ultimately detrimental
to their collective interest.
This conflict between the collective interest and self-interest is often referred to as
the prisoners' dilemma. The prisoners' dilemma arises because in pursuing its self-
interest, each party imposes a cost on the other that it does not take into account.
In the capacity expansion game, Alpha's addition of extra capacity hurts Beta because it
drives down the market price. As we will see in Chapters 8 and 10, the prisoners' dilemma
is a key feature of equilibrium pricing and output decisions in oligopolistic industries.
Game Trees and Subgame Perfection
The matrix form is particularly convenient for representing games in which each
party moves simultancously. In many situations, however, decision making is sequen-
tial rather than simultaneous, and it is often more convenient to represent the game
with a game tree instead of a game matrix.
To illustrate such a situation, let us modify the capacity expansion game to allow
the firm to choose among three options: no expansion of current capacity, a small
expansion, or a large expansion. For contrast, let us first examine what happens
when both firms decide simultaneously. This game is represented by the 3-by-3
| 722el
Game 'Theory • 37
FIGURE 1.16
GAME TREE FOR SEQUENTIAL. CAPACITY EXPANSION GAME
Do Not Expand
(518, $18)
Do Not Expand
Small
($15, $20)
Large
Do Not Expand
Alpha,
(S9, $18)
($20, $15)
Beta,
Small
Small
(S16, S16)
Large
Do Not Expand
($8, $12)
(S18, $9)
Beta
Small
(512, $8)
(SO, SO)
Alpha has three choices: DO NOT EXPAND, SMALL, and LARGE. Given Alpha's choice,
Beta must then choose among DO NOT EXPAND, SMALL, LARGE. For whatever choice
Alnha makes. Beta will make the choice that maximizes its profit. (These are underlined.)
Given Beta's expected choices, Alpha's optimal choice is LARGE.
matrix in Table 1.4. We leave it to the reader to verify that the Nash equilibrium in
this game is (SMALL, SMALL).
But now suppose that Alpha seeks to preempt Beta by making its capacity decision
a year before Beta's. Thus, by the time Beta makes its decision, it will have observed
Alpha's choice and must adjust its decision making accordingly.'
12 We can represent
the dynamics of this decision-making process by the game tree in Figure 1.16.
In analyzing this game tree, we see what is known as a subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium (SPNE). In an SPNE, each player chooses an optimal action at each
stage in the game that it might conceivably reach and believes that all other players
will behave in the same way.
To derive the SPNE, we use the so-called fold-back method: We start at the end
of the tree, and for each decision node (represented by squares), we find the optimal
decision for the firm situated at that node. In this example, we must find Beta's opti-
mal decision for each of the three choices Alpha might make: DO NOT EXPAND,
SMALL, and LARGE. By folding back the tree in this fashion, we assume that Alpha
anticipates that Beta will choose a profit-maximizing response to any strategic move
Alpha might make. Given these expectations, we can then determine Alpha's optimal
strategy. We do so by mapping out the profit that Alpha gets as a result of each
option it might choose, given that Beta responds optimally. The fold-back analysis
tells us the following:
• If Alpha chooses DO NOT EXPAND, then given Beta's optimal reaction,
Alpha's profit will be $15 million.
• If Alpha chooses SMALL, then given Beta's optimal reaction, Alpha's profit
will be $16 million.
38 • Chapter 1 • Basie Microeconomic Principles
• If Alpha chooses LARGE, then given Beta's optimal reaction, Alpha's profit
will be $18 million.
The SPNE is thus for Alpha to choose LARGE. Beta responds by choosing DO
NOT EXPAND.
Note that the outcome of the sequential-move game differs significantly from the
outcome of the simultaneous-move game. Indeed, the outcome involves a strategy for
Alpha (LARGE) that would be dominated if Alpha and Beta made their capacity
choices simultaneously. Why is Alpha's behavior so different when it can move
first? Because in the sequential game, the firm's decision problems are linked through
time: Beta can see what Alpha has done, and Alpha can thus count on a rational
response by Beta to whatever action it chooses. In the sequential-move game, Alpha's
capacity choice has commitment value; it forces Beta into a corner. By committing to
a large-capacity expansion, Alpha forces Beta into a position where Beta's best
response yields the outcome that is most favorable to Alpha. By contrast, in the
simultaneous-move game, Beta cannot observe Alpha's decision, so the capacity
decision no longer has commitment value for Alpha. Because of this, the choice of
LARGE by Alpha is not nearly as compelling as it is in the sequential game. We dis-
cuss commitment in detail in Chapter 9.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
• The total cost function represents the relationship between a firm's total costs and the
total amount of output it produces in a given time period.
•
Total costs consist of fixed costs, which do not vary with output, and variable costs.
Average costs equal total costs divided by total output. Marginal costs represent the
additional cost of producing one more unit of output. Average costs are minimized at
the point where average costs equal marginal cost.
•
Sunk costs are costs that cannot be recovered if the firm stops producing or otherwise
changes its decisions.
•
Economic costs and economic profits depend on the costs and profits the firm would have
realized had it taken its next best opportunity. These are distinct from costs and profits
reported on accounting statements.
•
The demand curve traces the amount that consumers are willing to pay for a good at
different prices, all else equal. Most demand curves are downward sloping. The price elas-
ticity of demand measures the percentage change in the quantity purchased for a 1 percent
change in price, all else equal.
•
Firms facing downward-sloping demand curves must reduce price to increase sales. A firm's
marginal revenue is the additional revenue generated when the firm sells one more unit.
Firms maximize profits by producing up to the point where the marginal revenue from an
additional sale exactly equals the marginal cost.
•
In a perfectly competitive market, there are many firms selling identical products to many
consumers. No firm can influence the price it charges.
The supply curve in a perfectly competitive market is the sum total of each firm's marginal
cost curve; it represents the total quantity that firms are willing to sell at any given price.
The market demand curve represents the total quantity that consumers are willing to pur-
chase at any given price.
94 546069 8
Endnotes • 39

•
In a competitive equilibrium, the market price and quantity are given by the point where
the supply curve intersects the demand curve
In the competitive equilibrium, firms produce up to the point where price equals marginal
cost. In the long run, entry forces prices to equal the minimum average cost of production.
Game theoretic models explicitly account for how one firm's decisions may affect the
decisions of its rivals. In a Nash equilibrium, all firms are making optimal choices,
given the choices of their rivals.
Matrix forms may be used to analyze games in which firms make simultaneous choices.
Extensive forms are more appropriate when analyzing games when choices are sequential.
OUESTIONS
1. What are the distinctions among fixed costs, sunk costs, variable costs, and marginal costs?
If the average cost curve is increasing, must the marginal cost curve lie above the average
cost curve? Why or why not?
Why are long-run average cost curves usually at or below short run-average cost curves?
What is the difference between economic profit and accounting profit? Why should man-
agers focus mainly on economic profits? Why do you suppose managers often focus on
accounting profits?
5. A Giffen good violates the law of demand; when its price increases, the quantity demanded
increases, all else equal. (The "all else equal" condition rules out situations where consum-
ers judge the quality or prestige of a good by its price.) Economists who try to identify
Giffen goods often examine diet staples like rice and potatoes, and focus on periods of
famine. Why might staple foods be Giffen goods under such circumstances?
6. Explain why we might expect the price elasticity of demand for nursing home care to be
more negative than the price elasticity of demand for heart surgery.
Why is marginal revenue less than total revenue?
8. Why does the elasticity of demand affect a firm's optimal price?
9. Explain why long-run prices in a perfectly competitive market tend toward the minimum
average cost of production.
10. Is the prisoners' dilemma always a Nash equilibrium? Is a Nash equilibrium always a pris-
oners' dilemma? Explain.
11. Does the equilibrium outcome of a game in extensive form depend on who moves first?
Explain.
ENDNOTES
'This example is drawn from Richard Tedlow's history of the soft drink industry in
his book New and Improved: The Story of Mass Marketing in America, New York, Basic
Books, 1990.
2We will discuss this relationship in Chapter 8.
'The third, fourth, and fifth sections of this chapter are the most "technical." Instructors
not planning to cover Chapters 8-11 can skip this material.
'The first part of this section closely follows the presentation of cost functions on pp. 42-
45 of Dorfian, R., Prices and Markets, 2nd ed., Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1972.
Students sometimes confuse total costs with average (i.e., per unit) costs, noting that
for many real-world firms "costs" seem to go down as output goes up. As we will see, average
40 • Chapter 1 • Basic Microeconomic Principles
costs could indeed go down as output goes up. The total cost function, however, always
increases with output.
This term was coined by Thomas Nagle in The Strategy and Tactics of Pricing, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1987.
"Some authors call these programmed costs. See, for example, Rados, D. L., Pushing the
Numbers im Marketing: A Real-World Guide to Essential Financial Analysis, Westport, CT,
Quorum Books, 1992.
*It is customary to put the minus sign in front, so that we convert what would ordinarily be
a negative number (because AQ and AP have opposite signs) into a positive one.
"One complication should be noted: A given product's price elasticity of demand is
not the same at all price levels. This means that an elasticity that is estimated at a price level
of, say, $10 would be useful in predicting the impact of an increase in price to $11, but it
would not accurately predict the impact of an increase to, say, $50, a price that is far
outside the neighborhood of the price at which the elasticity was originally estimated. This
is due to the properties of percentages, which require dividing by base amounts. If the
price is so high that the quantity demanded is close to zero, even small absolute increases
in quantity can translate into huge percentage increases.
1°The use of this formula is subject to the caveat expressed earlier about the use of elas-
ticities. It is useful for contemplating the effects of "incremental" price changes rather
than dramatic price changes.
This result is subject to the following qualification. If certain key inputs are scarce,
the entry of additional firms bids up the prices of these inputs. The firm's average and
marginal cost functions then shift upward; in the long run, the market price will settle
down at a higher level. An industry in which this happens is known as an increasing-cost
industry. The case we focus on in the text is known as a constant-cost industry.
1?To keep the example as simple as possible, we will assume only two stages of
decision making: Alpha makes its choice first, and then Beta responds. We do not consider
the possibility that Alpha might respond to the capacity decision that Beta makes.

